Title: Great BBC documentary on Youtube of mountain building and collapse highlighting Tibet
Date: 2012-08-22
slug: roof-of-world-video
tags: orogeny, active faults, research, tectonics

*This was a post that originally appeared on my old blog.*

I was sent a great BBC video entitled [‘Roof of the World’][video]  that does a
nice job of outlining many of the modern concepts of mountain building
(orogeny) and related collapse (taphrogeny), with emphasis on the
Tibetan/Himalayan system and Greece, keeping the tools of the trade central to
the story.  There is a lot of gorgeous footage of the dramatic mountain
scenery, featuring many of the rock stars of the contemporary academic regime
(e.g., P. England, J.-P. Avouac, M. Searle, P. Molnar).  Despite being almost
15 years old, many of the ideas presented here are still driving the science.
The film isn’t as ‘dated’ as some of the commenters would have one believe.
With respect to Tibet and the Himalaya, the only Big Ideas not discussed are
the channel flow models of the Himalaya (south-directed, a la [Beaumont][b])
and of Tibet (east-directed, a la [Clark and Royden][cr]), which were published
a few years after the movie came out.  There is also not much discussion of the
effect of India’s underthrusting of Tibet, either; the situation is presented
as a vertically-homogeneous collision, which of course is a problematic
approximation.

While I think my favorite part is the scenery, I am very impressed by the ease
with which the theories are communicated and the fluidity with which the field
and analytical techniques are integrated into the narrative.  The animations
definitely help, but a big part of it is simply that many of the modern,
cutting-edge concepts in tectonics aren’t actually that complicated.  The
treatment of lithosphere as a viscous fluid, the effects of mantle
delamination, gravitational collapse, etc., are fairly simple and intuitive
concepts.

The genius involved in this kind of work isn’t the mental power and agility
necessary to get one’s mind around these ideas, it is the mental power and
agility required to look at an enormous pyramid of granite and think of fluid
dynamics–actually deriving these concepts from the observation is the hard
part.  Well, it’s one of the hard parts.  Figuring out how to quantify and test
these concepts (which are hypotheses, of course) against observational data,
and to refine, reject and replace them if necessary, is an often harder part.
It’ll be interesting to see what the science looks like in another 15 years–I
have some predictions on what will stand, fall, or rise, but these will be
tested as well.

[video]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rmmFESUWXOc
[b]: http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v414/n6865/abs/414738a.html
[cr]: http://geology.gsapubs.org/content/28/8/703.abstract
