---
title: SSA 2021: Estimating fault slip rates in the Cascadia region of North America using joint geologic-geodetic block modeling
author: Richard Styron
date: 2021-10-07
slug: ssa-2021-cascadia-block-modeling
---

*This is the presentation I gave at the Seismological Society of America 
meeting this spring. It highlights ongoing work on incorporating block modeling 
into seismic hazard analysis.*

*Authors: Richard Styron, Tiegan Hobbs, Nick Harrichhausen, Murray Journeay*

<script async class="speakerdeck-embed" 
data-id="8ab2f2e1a130468cbc212bb573020e21" data-ratio="1.77777777777778" 
src="//speakerdeck.com/assets/embed.js"></script>



### Abstract

The western margin of North America in the Cascadia region is known to be 
seismically active, but the locations, geometries, kinematics and slip rates of 
the primary upper plate faults are very incompletely known. This is in large 
part due to environmental challenges, including rugged terrain, dense 
vegetation, and rapid geomorphic processes that may quickly modify the 
signature left by crustal faulting. To improve seismic hazard analysis in the 
area, we are characterizing hundreds of faults throughout British Columbia, 
Washington, Oregon and their periphery through the construction of a 
large-scale, high-resolution tectonic block model. In the model, 
independently-moving blocks are separated by faults, which slip at the rate of 
local relative block motion. This technique allows us to incorporate and 
integrate a range of datasets including geologic mapping, high-resolution 
topography data, GNSS geodetic data, and Quaternary fault slip rate data. To 
make the model, fault traces are mapped in GIS. Then, blocks are constructed by 
connecting fault traces, considering these same data as well as earthquake 
hypocenters as well as other available information. The block modeling program 
then solves for the rotation poles of all blocks by inverting GNSS and 
Quaternary fault slip rate data, and accounting for the effects of locking of 
faults and the Cascadia megathrust on GNSS velocities, and predicts 
internally-consistent slip rates for each fault in the model. As this work is 
in progress, we will present provisional results, and discuss the possibilities 
and challenges of the work, including the nature of fault connectivity and 
off-fault deformation.

