---
title: "Science writing: What we know vs. what we don't know"
author: Richard Styron
date: 2018-05-24
slug: science-writing-what-we-know-what-we-dont
tags: science, writing, knowledge frontier
---

Academic science writing (primarily journal articles) uses a rhetorical 
framework that lays out a portion of some scientific discipline or natural 
process, shows where the 'knowledge frontier' that bounds what is known and 
what is unknown, and zooms into that frontier to answer a tidy question and 
install a very small bit of knowledge infrastructure that extends the knowledge 
frontier incrementally out into the wilderness. The focus is generally right at 
the frontier, with just enough of the knowledge 'civilization' mapped out to 
orient other scientists, and just enough of the wilderness speculated upon to 
give some idea of where the new piece of knowledge infrastructure might lead 
without opening the scientist up to being slapped when the future reveals 
differently. Much of the writing, reviewing and general effort is in making 
sure the nuts and bolts of the small scientific contribution are solid, but the 
aims of the community are generally forward, looking out into the wilderness. 

System constraints are largely responsible for the narrow focus of academic 
science writing. Peer review is at the top of the list: Many reviewers (myself 
included) don't always like to see too much speculation in a paper. Such 
speculation is too frequently poorly-reasoned justification for why the work 
done in the article is important, or how it 'proves' a theory, rather than a 
well-thought-out description of uncertainty and possibility. I also believe 
that most readers of a paper are not reading to understand the exact question 
that the authors of a paper are trying to answer; they may want to answer a 
related question, or get the data for a very different study from the same 
region. The data and results of a paper (and often methods) have a longer 
shelf-life than the discussion. A long discussion of what we don't know is very 
rarely appropriate in a typical paper. Review papers are different, of course.

However, the sheer difficulty of creating a new piece of knowledge also makes 
one focus narrowly on the task at hand, and rightly so. Much of the discipline 
required to do science is used to force yourself to walk, not to run, and to 
crawl when you have to over sharp and rough terrain. Mistakes can be subtle and 
you need to do work that others can rely on. It is hard to make the switch from 
slow, deliberate and careful work to unmoored, ungrounded intellectual 
exploration through thought experiments and so forth.

(Does this restrict the progress of science, by making us into incrementalist 
drones that aren't capable of high-risk, high-reward science as is often 
claimed? Probably, a little, but as claimed by [Richard 
Hamming](http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~robins/YouAndYourResearch.html) and 
[others](https://marginalrevolution.com/?s=hamming) knowledge grows 
exponentially, as does the economy, and with science the downside tail risks of 
propagating false information are as asymmetrically large vs. the upside and as 
consequential as they are in investing. Let knowledge progress incrementally. A 
speedup of a few percent is a fine goal.)

Popular science writing, on the other hand, aims backwards, describing what the
state of knowledge is at the frontier and maps it back to familiar 
civilization, where the audience resides. The best of it, such as work done by 
[Quanta Magazine](quatamagazine.org) or in books (often written by scientists 
rather than journalists) does a good job of describing the frontier and the 
potential layout of the near wilderness, and may speculate at what may lie 
beyond. The majority, however, doesn't. It focuses on what we know, rather than 
what we don't know. It may be presenting new work in a context appropriate for 
a non-specialist audience, or giving some background for a current event.

There aren't many good fora for far forward-looking scientific discussion, or 
in-depth discussion of what we don't know. Much of it happens verbally, in 
seminars or conferences, and especially over beers after these events. Blogs 
could be a great venue, but a lot of science blogging is popular science 
writing, explainers of topics or current events by scientists and graduate 
students, or promotion of recent papers or datasets. Then there is a lot of 
blogging about the scientific experience: advice for grad students, stuff about 
conferences, minority representation/experience, etc. Finally, there are a 
number of blog posts by various folks that describe methods (particularly 
computational) for other practitioners, and these are extremely useful. All of 
this stuff is necessary and usually interesting, but it still focuses on what's 
known when it focuses on knowledge at all.

Discussion boards like Reddit and Hacker News are in principle good places to 
read and write about what's not known, but the median quality of a post is low 
and I don't think professional scientists use them very much for this. They're 
also probably seen as a waste of time and/or a guilty pleasure, quite 
correctly. Maybe there is good discussion on twitter, but that's a terrible 
forum for nuance and detail and I avoid it.

As scientists, we have to have some mental maps of what we know and what we 
don't in order to plan (and to write introducitons to proposals and articles). 
I think that most of these maps stay mental. As I skip around between 
timescales and methods in my exploration of faulting (the focus of my 
research), I lose track of a lot of things that are in my head on sub-topics 
that I haven't worked in a few years. I think that the benefits of 
instantiating thoughts on what we don't know are probably great, but it's 
obviously difficult to lay this out with specificity. I have started to keep 
detailed digital notes (currently using org-mode but it's a non-starter on iOS, 
a problem for note-taking on the go, and I need to be able to draw diagrams). I 
think I'm also going to use this blog to write stuff out more, which helps 
organize thoughts and 'trim branches from the logic tree' as we do in PSHA, as 
well as for archival purposes. No one reads my blog so restricting discussion 
to the comments is not effectively restricting.

I'll start, you know, tomorrow.

